
The Social and Cultural Order of Ancient Egypt offers a completely new interpretation of Ancient Egypt. Based on insight from anthropology it complement and enhance the archeological material and gives some new interpretation on otherwise accepted truths about Ancient Egypt. It is argued that Ancient Egyptian culture can only be understood in relation to its reproductive condition and that Ancient Egypt must be seen as part of a larger regional trade network including the Levant and Mesopotamia in the west, Nubia, and Africa to the south. Egypt's splendors would not have been possible without such trade opportunities that made it possible for a small section of society to export gold for foreign prestige goods. This laid the foundation for a steep social hierarchy and paved the way towards the Old Kingdom. This new perspective makes it possible to interpret e.g., that The Narmer Palette is not about unification, it is telling about Narmer's position in a larger cosmos. Enclosures were not places for funerary preparations, but places for collecting tax. Pyramids are not graves but places for the 'gods' Re and Osiris to meet and rejuvenate the cosmos.
The Social and Cultural Order of Ancient Egypt: An Ethnographic & Regional Analysis
List of Content

Introduction	2
Chapter 1  A regional perspective on Ancient Egypt	9
Chapter 2  Gold and social organization	66
Chapter 3  Ancient Egyptian cosmology	81
Chapter 4  Ancient Egyptian concept of personhood – Living in two lands	121
Chapter 5  Ancient practices	140
Conclusion	195
Bibliography	203


Introduction





Ancient Egypt.  It continues to challenge our imagination and it gives raise to endless speculations.  There are good reasons for this interest in Ancient Egypt.  It has mesmerized people all through the ages.  Everything about it seems splendid and extraordinary.  It was a time and place where everything seemed mythical and magical.  Egypt seems full of wonders from an ancient, mysterious and bygone world.  A world of majestic buildings and seemingly strange practices.
  Ancient Egypt has mesmerized people all through the ages.  Even the Old Greek philosophers were confounded.  Herodotus (writing at the time of the 27th Dynasty) when introducing his readers to the curious land of Egypt and her even more curious inhabitants, writes:
“About Egypt I shall have a great deal more to relate because of the number of remarkable things which the country contains, and because of the fact that more monuments which beggar description are to be found there than anywhere else in the world. …  Not only is the Egyptian climate peculiar to that country and the Nile different in its behavior from other rivers elsewhere, but the Egyptians themselves in their manners and customs seem to have reversed the ordinary practices of mankind” (in Tyldesley 2011: 16).
  This fascination with Ancient Egypt seem never to have waned off.  Now a day, the same kind of enthrallment can be found in hundreds of books and on the internet.  E.g., such as this:
“Ancient Egypt was the preeminent civilization in the Mediterranean world. … Egypt’s majesty has long entranced archaeologists and historians and created a vibrant field of study all its own: Egyptology. … The picture that emerges is of a culture with few equals in the beauty of its art, the accomplishment of its architecture or the richness of its religious traditions” (History.com Editors 2009).
  In addition, pictorial and written sources reveal nearly everything about everyday life in Ancient Egypt.  Inside the tombs, every single ordinary activity is on display.  Moreover, the chronicles tell us when, where, and who built the different temples.  It was a place of seemingly limitless richness, majestic buildings and strange practices.  Impressive Pyramids, Divine Pharaohs, and surreal Gods.  
  However, these drawings and chronicles are also completely silent about the rationales and dynamics that motivated the ancient Egyptians to build exceptional structures like the pyramids.  There are very few records about their construction.  Later civilizations, awestruck at these huge and amazing structures – the only remaining wonders of the ancient world – can find no explanation at all for them in the Egyptian records. Not a word. Indeed, “no ancient texts have been found that clearly tell us how or why pyramid complexes were built” (Wenke 2009: 296).  It seems the truth about this strange culture is buried somewhere in the sand.  What is more, our curiosity is kept alive as new fantastic finds keeps pouring out of the ground. Dig deeper.
  Alternatively, we could gather all the present archeological knowledge about Ancient Egypt’s social reproduction, social organization and cosmology to give a holistic account of its ‘cultural order’ and then relate this to its Ancient practices.  Pyramids, Pharaohs and local Gods are all cultural constructs.
  Therefore, our understanding of all these wonders and strange practices of Ancient Egypt have to be supplemented by a new narrative based on a holistic ethnographic perspective that relate all these phenomena to its social organization and culture.  Hence, the contention of this book is that all these wonders and the social organization that made them possible can only be understood by a holistic ethnographic study.  In short, we need to understand Ancient Egyptian culture.
  To help in this endeavor we are so lucky that, pictorial and written sources reveal nearly everything about everyday life in Ancient Egypt.  Inside the tombs, every single ordinary activity is on display.  Therefore, our understanding of all these wonders and strange practices of Ancient Egypt have to be supplemented by a new narrative based on a holistic ethnographic perspective that relate all these phenomena to its social organization and culture.  Hence, the contention of this book is that all these wonders and the social organization that made them possible can only be understood by a holistic ethnographic study.  In short, we need to understand Ancient Egyptian culture.
  To recreate Egypt’s ancient cultural order, we need anthropological theory and ethnographic material to complement and enhance the archeological material.  To be sure, anthropology is not a monolithic science.  There are all kinds of theories.  To specify the anthropological legacy of this study: culture is not seen as something people have, but something they do (to make sense of, and negotiate, the constitution of their social world).  As such, Egyptian culture is not regarded as possessing inherent qualities, or as a self-contained island characterized by particular traits.
  Instead, culture is here seen as linked to, or embedded in, a particular form of social organization that, in turn, is linked to larger systems of reproduction that condition the nature and possibilities of the social system in question.  In Friedman’s worlds:
“Our practical life is embedded in our material existences, which are themselves constituted within social reproductive processes” (Friedman 2014).
  As is evident, this way of understanding culture means that culture and its cosmology and categories are embedded in the reproductive condition of the groups involved.  These “materialistic” conditions defines what cannot be done (symbolically), but not how it is done.  Otherwise, people would merely live in a fantasy world – and to be sure, for some it appears that the Ancient Egyptians really did so.  They did not.
  Divine kingship, enormous buildings, wonders of the world.  To understand why these phenomena occurred in Egypt, and initially in a particular location on the Nile, Egyptian history needs to be inserted into a regional perspective (parce Bergendorff 1996, Wallerstein 1974, Friedman 1994, Frank 1998).
  This theoretical model simply states that the economic sphere is always larger than its corresponding cultural order, but that the economic sphere produces social conditions that local people have condition – the resultant negotiated order is what we call culture.  It is therefore important to establish the reproductive condition from the earliest times of Ancient Egypt, their locations and their relations to the larger world.  
  This approach to Ancient Egypt offer an explanation for its practices and cultural order and the marvelous constructions they made as well as the dynamics that made this possible.  In other words, the aim here is to understand how Ancient Egyptian cosmology and practice produced a social world that made all these marvels and wonders possible, but which also produced a very hierarchical society.
  Therefore, we first need to place Ancient Egypt it in the regional perspective that supplied the material conditions for its reproduction.  Then we need to investigate into how these material conditions was socially organized, which in all pre-monetary societies are done by some kind of kinship system.
  Then Ancient social condition and its resultant organization has to be related to its cosmology, i.e., its worldview that account for the forces that the Ancient believed “moved” the surrounding world.  Such worldview finds its expression in e.g., stories about genesis, and in concepts of personhood.
  We know that what was to become Ancient Egypt started in around 4000 BC with the Badarians.  These people were herders who circulated between the Eastern Desert and the Nile alluvium on a seasonal basis according to available resources.  Badarian culture changed into what is known as the Naqada people.  Due to climate change, the Naqadans gradually moved towards the river alluvial.  Over the years, Naqada society became increasingly hierarchical.
  Then there were initially three centers of Ancient development with social differentiation and hierarchy.  They were all located in Upper Egypt (to the south); Naqada, Abydos, and Hierakonpolis (later to be part of the same political unity probably ruled by a person called Narmer).  Significantly, all these centers were located close to large gold deposits in the Eastern Desert, and tellingly the ancient name for Naqada was Nubt, the Egyptian word for gold.  Nothing remotely similar transpired in Lower Egypt (to the north).
  So social development started with groups of herders long before Ancient Egypt became known as a breadbasket (later used by the Romans), and this development seems closely linked to the gold deposits in the Eastern Desert.  Actually, Ancient Egypt is the only known supplier of gold to the Levant and Mesopotamia at the time.  Places were gold were in large demand.
  Ancient Egypt and its initial development therefore seem closely associated with the gold deposits in the Eastern Desert. The utilization of this sought after resource in the Levant and Mesopotamia linked Egypt to the larger world.  Gold therefore seem to be a major factor in the materialistic condition of the development of Ancient Egypt.  It therefore also seem probably that gold and its monopolization by smaller groups determined the relationship between groups inside Ancient Egypt.
  In non-monetarized societies, relationships between groups are negotiated through some form of kinship system.  Kinship is the primordial way of organizing resources between groups and it reflects the character of the social reproduction of a society.  Therefore, it is exchange and alliance relations that determines the kind of kinship system a society have.  Kinship is a way of distributing resources between groups (Bergendorff 2016).  Ancient Egypt and its resource distribution must therefore be expressed through some form of kinship system.
  Moreover, there are a limited number of kinship systems.  But all systems forms essential parts of social organization, and therefore kinship systems are also a basic symbolic way of expressing the resource situation of a given society.  By comparing ethnographic material with ancient practices, we can determine what kind of kinship system that were likely to have operated in Ancient Egypt.  This, on the other hand, would also explain some Ancient practices, such as Divine Kinship and sibling marriage.
  Seen in this way, the Pharaoh’s position is a result of the resource distribution in society and an accompanying kinship system.  Gold would be an essential part of such a kinship system.  In a preliminary way can establish that the observed practices in Ancient Egypt points to some form of a matri-lateral cross-cousin marriage (with avuncular residence) (more later).
  The resulting reality was symbolically negotiated in the form of a cosmology and a conception of genesis and the constitution of the world.  This was a double sided world, as also known from ethnographic material, with a sphere for the living and one for the dead both equally important for the individual.  In a way, everybody lived in both world simultaneously, with a part in the world of the ancestors and one among the living, an unseen world and a visible world.  Such a worldview goes a long way in explaining many Ancient practices.  Pharaohs being special cases thought to be able to live simultaneously in both realm of existence, by their direct genealogical connection to the first ancestors and the creator of the world.
  Living in such a world was equally reflected in the ancient conception of personhood.  This consisted in several aspects or personalities, called the ba, the ka and the ank all “housed” in the visible realm in a “body”.  With the help of ethnographic material, these aspects of personhood have to be related to each other and to the larger cosmology.
  After having established the character of and relationship between these (often presented as disparate) cultural elements we can move forward to explain Ancient practices such as the Narmer Palette, large enclosures, the so-called sed-festival, Pharaoh’s double crowns, their titles and the purpose for building pyramids.
